\input texinfo
@c %**start of header
@setfilename wrez
@settitle WREZ infection engine manual
@c %**end of header

@ifinfo
This is the technical documentation and manual to the WREZ infection
engine.

Copyright @copyright{} 2002 Anonymous.
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@sp 10
@center @titlefont{WREZ infection engine manual}
@sp 2
@center version 0.0

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 2002 Anonymous.
@end titlepage

@contents

@comment node-name, next, previous, up
@node Top, WREZ Introduction, , (dir)

@menu
* WREZ Introduction:: A short introduction about the engine
* Index:: The alphabetical index
@end menu


@unnumbered WREZ Introduction

This introduction will guide you through the rest of the manual and
explains what its all about.

@cindex about WREZ
WREZ is a generic virus engine that provides a concise and powerful API to
provide various functionality for payload code. It can be used to embed
hostile code into and generally makes the world easier for this type of
payload. Currently, it is designed to infect ELF executeables on the Linux
operating system under the Intel IA32 architecture.

@cindex engine code
Most of the engine is written in position independant C code, while some
low level parts are written in IA32 assembly. The engine consists of a
number of independant modules. It is possible to enable and disable those
modules individually to reduce the overall engine size.

@cindex WREZ toolchain
A complete toolchain around the engine is provided. It includes tools to
infect executeable files, check for a possible infection and to disinfect
binaries which are infected with WREZ. The buildprocess is controlled
through a central @code{Makefile}, and a testing suite is provided to test
and demonstrate certain features of the engine using example binaries.


@chapter Using WREZ

This chapter describes how to control the WREZ build process. It will show
you how to enable and disable various features of the engine, how to
produce an initial infector and how to use it to infect an arbitrary
executeable.

@cindex building WREZ
@node Building WREZ,,,Top
@section Building WREZ

To build the engine from the sources, you need the complete GNU toolchain,
which includes @command{gcc}, @command{ld}, @command{objdump},
@command{objcopy}, @command{cpp} and @command{gmake}. Additionally you need
the have the @command{nasm} assembler and the @command{awk} script language
installed.

Ensure all of the above tools are properly installed before proceeding.

@cindex engine features, configuration
@subsection Configuring engine features

Open the @file{Makefile} file in your favorite editor. The first few lines
are the configuration section of the @file{Makefile}, where you can enable
and disable the features that will be in the virus produced. To enable
them, uncomment them. Be aware that some features depend on other features,
so only enable them in case you have this code enabled, too. To know what
features you need, determine what functionality of the API you need for
your payload. @xref{WREZ API}.

@subsection Building the virus binary

To build the virus binary, issue a "@command{make release}" command in the
top directory. When the build succeeds, a new directory
"@code{release-}@emph{version}" will be created accordingly and the following
files are created there:
@table @code
@cindex release target, files created
@item infect
A simple wrapper to infect a single executeable with vanilla options.

@item initial
The more detailed infection program, offering a more precise control of the
initial infection process.

@item wrez.bin.conf
This is a small configuration file providing some basic info about the
@file{wrez.bin.out} file, such as certain relative file offsets where
information can be stored. This file is important and is used by the
@file{initial} infector.

@item wrez.bin.out
The central virus image, containing the virus code and additional
configuration data. This is always the plain image, even when polymorph
infection is used, hence you can disassemble it without any problems. Note
that within an infected file this image is prepended with two opcodes:
@code{pusha} and @code{pushf}. This makes up two extra bytes. The
@file{initial} infector automatically cares for this, but it is important
to remember when analyzing the image alone.

@item wrezsweep
This is the disinfection utility, which is able to disinfect any file
infected with the version of the virus you just build. Keep this file safe,
as it offers a reliable way for automatic detection and disinfection.
@xref{wrezsweep utility}.

@end table

@cindex infect wrapper
@section Infecting executeables using @command{infect}

In most cases, after having build the virus image, you want to test it by
infecting a sample executeable. To do this common operation the
@command{infect} script has been created in the release directory. It is a
wrapper around the @command{initial} program. Just run @command{infect}
with the file you want to infect as argument:
@example
release % cp /bin/date .
release % ./infect date | tail -2
-rwx------    1 anon     anon        22820 Jan 11 18:38 date
-rwx------    1 anon     anon        26437 Jan 11 18:39 date.infected
release %
@end example
Note that @command{infect} automatically creates a copy of the file by
appending @file{.infected} to the original filename.


@cindex initial infector
@section Infecting executeables using @command{initial}

While the @command{infect} wrapper is what you commonly use, the background
work is done by the @command{initial} program. It understands details about
the virus structure and modifies them accordingly to make the virus work
within the victim executeable. It provides a number of command line
options, which are listed below.

@cindex initial, command line options
@subsection @command{initial} command line options

@command{initial} @code{[-c config] [-i virus-image] <victim>}

@table @code
@cindex wrez.bin.out, configuration
@item -c @emph{config}
Allows to use another configuration file. The default is to use the
@file{wrez.bin.conf} file which was created at the same time as the virus
was build.

@item -i @emph{outfile}
Allows you to specify another virus image to use for infection. The default
is to use the @file{wrez.bin.out} file created when the virus image was
build. However, you might want to keep multiple different versions of the
virus, and this option allows you to select which image file to use.

@item victim
This is a mandatory option since it tells the program which executeable to
infect. Note that there are some restrictions on the filename length, so in
case there is an error, try moving the file you want to infect to the local
directory and use a shorter pathname as parameter.
@end table

Note that the @command{initial} program infects the victim executeable
in-place, without creating a copy first.

@chapter WREZ Source distribution files

This chapter will explain the use of every source file within the wrez source
distribution. It should provide a rough map where to modify the engine.

@table @code
@cindex source, files

@item Makefile
The main build targets Makefile. The most important targets are
@command{release}, @command{dist}, @command{distclean} and @command{wrez}.
The individual targets are described in details. @xref{Building WREZ}.

@item common.c
Provides inlined small assembly versions of the most commonly used memory
functions, such as @code{strlen}, @code{memset} and similar functions.

@item commontest.c
A small testbed for the common functions, to ensure they are working
properly.

@item compress.sh
This script is called whenever a new virus image is build. It builds the
compressed virus image from the plain one, by detecting the boundary
between decompression stub and payload, compressing the payload and then
merging the decompression stub and compressed payload into the output file.
While doing this multiple files are created which reflect the certain
stages of the image. They can be very helpful when debugging the virus,
especially when polymorphism is enabled.

@item compressor.c
The LZ compression code resides here. The decompression stub is in
@file{wrez.asm} though. It is never used on its own, but called from within
@file{compress.sh} instead.

@item crypto-test.c
Testbed for the functionality residing in @file{crypto.c}. The make target
"@command{cryptotest}" drives this file.

@item crypto.c
@item crypto.h
Various abstractions to the crypto layers in WREZ. Prototype definitions
and API description for the functions reside in @file{crypto.h}.

@item debug/
Every small tool, script or helper application that is used only for the
purpose of debugging the engine is put here. Each file is independant from
the engine though, and you have to build them on your own.

@item doc/
Various piece of documentation, including this one resides here. The files
@file{CHANGELOG} and @file{TODO} fullfil their usual purpose.

@item fingerprint.c
@item fingerprint.h
The per-host fingerprinting code that is used throughout the engine for
different things is hold here. The prototypes and documentations for the
API reside in @file{fingerprint.h}.

@item initial.c
The source for the initial infector which is build into the
@code{release-}@emph{version}@code{/} directory when building the
"@code{release}" target.

@item int80-net.h
@item int80.h
Inlined versions of syscalls. The @file{int80-net.h} file includes only
network related socketcalls, while @file{int80.h} is the main syscall
include file. Add needed syscalls here, but ensure they are behaving as
documented on the manpage. Especially pay attention to what registers are
clobbered and ensure correct stack correction.

TODO
@item isolation/
@item lime-interface-test.c
@item lime-interface-test.lds
@item lime-interface.c
@item lime-interface.h
@item lime.asm
@item lookup-example/
@item lookup.c
@item lookup.h
@item obsolete/
@item release-@emph{version}/
@item tmp/
@item unistd.h
@item walker/
@item wrconfig.h
@item wrcore.c
@item wrez-link.lds
@item wrez.asm
@item wrezdefs.h
@item wrezdefs.inc
@item wrezsweep.c
@item wrutil.c

@end table


@chapter Limitations of viral code

@node WREZ API,,,Top
@chapter WREZ API

The engine provides a helpful API to its payload code, which allows the
payload to easily accomplish some common tasks. This chapter will explain
the complete API and shows how to use it by giving small example code
snippets.

@cindex helper macros
@section Helper macros

WREZ provides some macros to work around the limitations of viral code,
such as position indendance.

@cindex STRINGPTR macro
@subsection STRINGPTR macro
The @code{STRINGPTR} macro provides a straightforward way to refer to a
constant string. Note that the escape character '@code{\}' has to be
escaped itself, as the macro runs through the C string processor twice.
The macro sets a pointer to the string, as shown in this example:
@example
@{
    char *  strptr;  /* pointer to ASCIIZ string */

    STRINGPTR (strptr, "hello world\\n");
@}
@end example

@cindex FUNCPTR macro
@subsection FUNCPTR macro
The @code{FUNCPTR} macro circumvents the limitations of obtaining the
address of a virus function. In non position independant code, such as a
normal executeable, it is possible to obtain the address to a function by
simple referring the function name within an @emph{r-value} or by using the
'@code{&}' operator. Within PIC code this is not possible, since the
address is not known at link time. However, by use of the @code{FUNCPTR}
macro a small instruction sequence is inlined into the code, which computes
the correct address to a function. The following code would resolve the
address of the @code{wrez_main} function:
@example
@{
    void *  wrfunc;

    FUNCPTR (wrfunc, "wrez_main");
@}
@end example

@cindex system calls
@section Calling syscalls

The file @file{int80.h} provides inlined versions of a large number of
common Linux system calls. To use them from within your payload code, just
include the file and use the syscalls as usual. They get inlined into your
code and behave as you would expect it. When a syscall is missing, copy the
code of a syscall with the same number of arguments and rename it
accordingly.

@example

#include "int80.h"
...
    /* use the fork syscall, see the fork(2) manpage */
    while (fork ())
        ;
@end example

@cindex library calls
@section Library calls

WREZ provides an API to resolve any function symbol of any shared object.
This can be used to call functions from libraries such as @command{libc}.
In the following example we run the shell command "@command{uname -a}"
using the @command{system} library function.

@example
@{
    char *  systemf;
    char *  command;
    int     (* system)(char *);

    STRINGPTR (systemf, "system");
    STRINGPTR (command, "uname -a");

    system = symbol_resolve ((void *) cfg->elf_base, systemf);
    if (system != NULL)
        system (command);
@}
@end example

All the symbol resolving is done with the help of the lookup module. The
module provides the "@code{symbol_resolve}" function, which takes two
parameters. The first parameter is the "@code{elf_base}", a pointer to the
first byte of the ELF header. For normal Linux executeables it is usually
@code{0x08048000}, but you can provide another address if you know it. This
has some uses which are detailed later, when call hooking is discussed. The
second parameter is a pointer to an ASCIIZ string with the function name
you want to resolve. After processing the input parameters the function
tries to resolve the symbol and upon success returns a pointer to the entry
point of the function referred by the symbol. On failure, @code{NULL} is
returned, which is checked for in the example code. After resolving the
function can be used as if it would be a normal library call, as long as
you keep the pointer to it.


@cindex disinfection
@chapter Disinfection

When an executeable has been infected by a WREZ virus, nearly no
information is lost. Hence it is possible to reconstruct a working
executeable from the infected executeable, which does not include the virus
code. The @command{wrezsweep} utility provides the functionality to detect
and optionally remove and extract the viral code from an executeable. This
chapter provides a description of the tool and advice for manual
disinfection.

It is not possible to reconstruct the original executeable perfectly, as
two padding arrays are joined when infecting the file. Upon disinfection it
is not clear where the original seperation was. It would be possible to
store this information within the virus itself, but as the padding has no
function besides aligning the following data, this was not done. As a
result, the disinfected executeable may be up to 32 bytes longer than the
original, uninfected executeable was. Every bit of functionality was
preserved, though, and the binaries behave in exactly the same way. Also,
the load image is exactly the same, only the dead file image may differ.

@cindex disinfection, manual
@section Manual disinfection

With some knowledge of the ELF file format and the wrez infection method it
is possible to disinfect an infected executeable manually. Please do not
attempt disinfection without knowledge of the ELF format.

First, the virus must be located within the file. Since the file could be
infected only with section headers in the first place, you can use section
headers to help you locate it. Infact, it may be the only reliable way to
do this. To do this, first locate the end of the @code{.bss} section
(@code{sh_offset} + @code{sh_size}). The @command{ht} and @command{biew}
tools come in handy at this. Directly after the section ends, there is
either the section header string table or there is virus code. The virus
code starts with a fake @code{.ctors} address, so it looks like
@example
00006204: 08 F2 04 08 9C 60 E8 3D 00 00 00 C2 A8 04 08 07 01 00 00 98
@end example
Where @code{08 F2 04 08}, decoded as little endian 32 bit offset
@code{0x0804f208} is the entry point of the virus. This is always the
virtual address directly behind the address itself. So the code at the
entry point starts with @code{9C 60 E8 3D 00 00 00}, which is a sequence of
the @command{pusha, pushf, call $+0x3d} instructions. Everything from this
offset (@code{0x6204}) up to the last byte of the data @code{PT_LOAD}
segment belongs to the virus. This entire part of the file can be
removed later and the data behind it has to slide to the front.

But first its important to know the address of the @code{.ctors} section as
the section header table shows it. As WREZ disguises the real address, and
the real active @code{.ctors} address is independant from what the section
header shows, the address of the @code{.ctors} section header is still the
old original one. Just the one used to activate the @code{.ctors} in the
code has changed upon infection. We have to change it back, so write the
address down with the help of either @command{objdump} or @command{ht}.
@example
$ objdump -h infected | grep "\.ctors"
 17 .ctors        00000008  0804ee94  0804ee94  00005e94  2**2
@end example
So the virtual address is @code{0x0804ee94}, and the @code{.ctors} section
starts at offset @code{0x5e94} within the file.

@cindex removing the virus
@subsection Step 1. Removing the virus code

Now remove the virus code from the file and slide all the data behind it to
the front. Slide it forward so that the first byte which was after the
virus data now starts where the @code{.bss} section starts within the file.
In the example from above, it would start at file offset @code{0x6204 -
bss.sh_size}. Calculate the number of bytes you slided the data forward, it
will be called @emph{displacement} from now on.

Afterwards there are four things remaining that must be changed to repair
the now damaged file. The next two steps are enough to make the file run
again, without any virus code, while the last two steps will fixup the
section headers, so that debug tools work on the file again.

@cindex .ctors address, restoring the
@subsection Step 2. Restoring @code{.ctors}

To restore the @code{.ctors} activation code, you have to locate it within
the file. To do this, just search for the virtual address the virus is
mapped at. This is the same address we decoded above, minus four:
@code{0x0804f204} (@code{= 0x0804f208 - 4}). This will result in at least
one hit, which is within an immediate 32 bit register load, most likely
into the @code{%ebx} register, so a possible hit will look like:
@example
00003C17: BB 04 F2 04 08 83 3D 04 F2 04 08 FF 74 0C 8B 03 FF D0 83 C3
@end example
Where the address is at @code{0x3c18} and @code{0xbb} is
"@code{movl ..., %ebx}". Overwrite the address with the original one you
extracted from the @code{.ctors} section header.

@cindex PT_LOAD segment header, fixing the
@subsection Step 3. Fixing @code{PT_LOAD} segment header

Now, seek to the program header table and inspect the second @code{PT_LOAD}
header. Both the @code{p_filesz} and @code{p_memsz} elements of the
structure must be fixed. The @code{p_filesz} element must be decreased by
the @emph{displacement}, which is the virus length plus the @code{.bss}
section length. The @code{p_memsz} element must be decreased by just the
virus in-memory length. So the entire calculation is this:
@example
        vlen_mem = ptl2.p_offset + ptl2.p_memsz;
        vlen_mem -= bss.sh_offset + bss.sh_size;
        vlen_file = ptl2.p_offset + ptl2.p_filesz;
        vlen_file -= bss.sh_offset;

        ptl2.p_filesz -= vlen_file;
        ptl2.p_memsz -= vlen_mem;
@end example

@cindex section header table offset, fixing the
@subsection Step 4. Fixing @code{eh_shoff} ELF header entry

Decrease the @code{eh_shoff} ELF header element by @emph{displacement}.
Since the section header table usually lies after and @code{PT_LOAD}
segments, it is moved by removing the virus code from the executeable and
we have to fix the section header table offset.

@cindex section header table, fixing the
@subsection Step 5. Fixing section header table

As final step we have to fix any section header that is refering to data
that was behind the virus, as it was slided to the front by
@emph{displacement} bytes. Examine every section header at @code{eh_shoff},
and correct the @code{sh_offset} elements if they lie behind the last byte
refered by the @code{PT_LOAD} data segment.

@example
    for (n = 0 ; n < elfhdr.e_shnum ; ++n) @{
        if (sectionhdr[n].sh_offset > (ptl2.p_offset + ptl2.p_filesz))
            sectionhdr[n].sh_offset -= displacement;
    @}
@end example

@node wrezsweep utility,,,Top
@cindex wrezsweep utility
@section @command{wrezsweep} utility

The @command{wrezsweep} utility is very natural to use. In its default mode
it takes filenames provided on the command line. Each filename is checked
for infections, after it has been ensured its a @code{ET_EXEC},
@code{EM_386} executeable. When an infection is found a message is printed
and details are shown. When disinfection has been enabled, it automatically
tries to disinfect the file. Enabling the verbose mode is a good idea when
you know about the internals or you are about to disinfect the file
manually. The utility will most likely detect other viruses, which use the
same infection method, such as the
@cindex VIT virus
@emph{VIT virus}, written by silvio. Disinfection uses details related to
the workings of the WREZ engine however, so it is not possible to disinfect
files which are infected with other viruses.

@subsection @command{wrezsweep} command line options
@command{wrezsweep} @code{[-hxDv] [-d virus] <file1 [file2 [...]]>}

@table @code
@cindex wrezsweep help
@item -h
Print the usage and exit.

@cindex disinfection, automatic
@item -x
Once an infection has been detected, try to disinfect the file in-place.

@cindex polymorph disinfection
@item -D
Fall back to extract the correct original @code{.ctors} address from the
section header table instead of parsing the virus configuration structure.
This has to be used to deal with binaries that are infected with a
polymorph version of the virus. Generally has no negative effect.

@cindex wrezsweep verbose mode
@item -v
Be more verbose, especially when disinfecting files.

@cindex virus extraction, automatic
@item -d virus
Extract the entire virus body from the file and save it to "@file{virus}".
Note that the @code{.ctors} address is not included in the body. However,
it is shown when detecting an infected file.

@item file1, file2, @dots{}, file@emph{n}
Files to scan for infections. Once an infection is noticed, appropiate
actions are taken, as controlled by the other command line options.

@end table

@cindex wrezsweep example
@subsection @command{wrezsweep} example use

In the following example we use the @command{wrezsweep} utility to
disinfect an infected copy of the @file{date} executeable. The infected
copy is called @file{date.infected}.

@example
$ ls -l date date.infected ; \
> ./wrezsweep -x -v date date.infected ; \
> ls -l date date.infected

-rwx------    1 anon     anon        22820 Apr 10 22:30 date
-rwx------    1 anon     anon        26962 Apr 10 22:30 date.infected

wrezsweep - version 0.2

scanning 2 files
disinfection enabled
====================================================================
FILE date
CLEAN: date
FILE date.infected
WARNING: file "date.infected", possible infection detected !
         memory: 8856 bytes at 0x0804f204
           file: 3638 (+5218 mem) bytes at 0x00006204
DISINFECTING
   old   ctors address: 0x0804ee94
   virus ctors address: 0x0804f204
   scanning for 0x0804f204 in: [0x0 - 0x5e54]
   found virus ctors activation code within crt0.o at: 0x00003c18
   scanning for 0x0804f204 in: [0x3c18 - 0x3c58]
   found second virus ctors activation code at: 0x00003c1e
   restored old ctors address
   disabled virus activation, viral code is still in file, though
   sliding 0x4d0 bytes at the end of file (0x101a bytes forward)
   section 24 fixed
   successfully removed viral code from file

-rwx------    1 anon     anon        22820 Apr 10 22:30 date
-rwx------    1 anon     anon        22840 Apr 10 22:30 date.infected

$
@end example

As you can see, the disinfected version of the file is 20 bytes larger than
the original version. This extra space comes from unused section padding
and has no effect on how the file behaves.

@node Index,,, Top
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye

