.TH objobf 1 "25 Mar 2003" "TEAM TESO"
.nh
.SH NAME
objobf \- burneye2 x86/Linux ELF relocateable object obfuscator
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B objobf [-o file] [-e] [-l func] [-c func] [-C func] [-v num] inputfile

.SH DESCRIPTION
This page documents the
.B burneye2
object file obfuscator utility,
.I objobf.
It reads one ELF relocateable object file and
produces a functional equivalent output file, which is an obfuscated version
of the input file. To do this,
.I objobf
breaks up all functions in the file to the basic block level. This
representation is used to mutate the code while keeping it semantically
equivalent. This involves dataflow analysis and basic block transformations.
Afterwards, the basic block representation as control flow graph is linearized
into a new object file, which is created from scratch.

.SH BETA SOFTWARE
Please note that the software is in an early state of development, and does
not contain some of the features mentioned. Right now it only has the ability
to reschedule the order of basic blocks among multiple functions
("entangling") and does not provide substantial protection against any kind of
analysis. It is meant as demonstration of the object input/output engine right
now.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.I "-o file"
Write the output to
.I file
rather than the default output file "output.o"
.TP
.I -e
Entangle basic blocks of all functions in the object. That is, the basic block
order is randomized globally while the control flow is properly maintained.
However, there are no opaque predicates between basic blocks right now, and
the entanglement is easily seperateable (but it does fsck with IDA very well
already ;)
.TP
.I "-l func"
Dump a register usage analysis for function
.I func.
More specifically, a live register dataflow analysis for the function is done
and written as VCG graph to the file "output.vcg". If the
.I VCG
program is installed as
.I xvcg,
an output file "output.ps" is created and displayed using
.I gv.
.TP
.I "-c func"
A simple control flow graph (CFG) of the function
.I func
is written as VCG file to "output.vcg". As with the
.I -l
option,
.I xvcg
is ran and the output is displayed with
.I gv.
.TP
.I "-v num"
Set the verbosity level for both the frontend (analyzation phase) and the
backend (obfuscation and linearization). Values between zero (0) and three (3)
are allowed, where 0 means low and 3 high verbosity. Default is zero (low).
.TP
.I "-r file"
Read the random data required from
.I file.
This allows for easier reproduction of bugs, as otherwise the random data is
always pulled dynamically from /dev/urandom.

.SH EXAMPLES

The included simple example shows how to use the obfuscator:
.PP
.in +4
.nf
gcc -c -o quicksort.o quicksort.c
objobf -v 3 -e -o quicksort_obf.o quicksort.o
gcc -o main main.c quicksort_obf.o
.fi
.in -4
.SH KNOWN BUGS
.I Switch tables.
Currently, switch tables cannot be linearized correctly. While there are
extensive heuristics to parse them in the analyzation phase, there is no code
yet to write a new relocation block for switch statements. Hence, do not use
switch's in code to be obfuscated. Will be fixed shortly.

.I Multiple code sections.
Only support for one code section (usually .text) in the object is supported.

.I GCC optimization problems.
When using optimization levels of three or higher (-O3 or -O6) with GCC, the
object parsing turns buggy. Please use no optimization or level two
optimizations (-O2).

.SH BUG REPORTS

If you find a bug (and that is for sure), please try to reproduce it with an
object as small as possible, as the analysis will be easier then. Please mail
me at
.I scut@team-teso.net

