.TH objobf 1 "05 Apr 2003" "TEAM TESO"
.nh
.SH NAME
objobf \- burneye2 x86/Linux ELF relocateable object obfuscator

version 0.4.9.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B objobf [options] inputfile

.SH DESCRIPTION
This page documents the
.B burneye2
object file obfuscator utility,
.I objobf.
It reads one ELF relocateable object file and
produces a functional equivalent output file, which is an obfuscated version
of the input file. To do this,
.I objobf
breaks up all functions in the file to the basic block level. This
representation is used to mutate the code while keeping it semantically
equivalent. This involves dataflow analysis and basic block transformations.
Afterwards, the basic block representation as control flow graph is linearized
into a new object file, which is created from scratch.

.SH BETA SOFTWARE
Please note that the software is in an early state of development, and does
not contain some of the features mentioned. Right now it only has the ability
to insert junk instructions and reschedule the order of basic blocks among
multiple functions ("entangling") and does not provide substantial protection
against any kind of analysis. Currently, it is meant as demonstration.

.SH OPTIONS - GENERAL
.TP
.I "-o file"
Write the output to
.I file
rather than the default output file "output.o"
.TP
.I "-v num"
Set the verbosity level for both the frontend (analyzation phase) and the
backend (obfuscation and linearization). Values between zero (0) and three (3)
are allowed, where 0 means low and 3 high verbosity. Default is zero (low).
.TP
.I "-r file"
Read the random data required from
.I file.
This allows for easier reproduction of bugs, as otherwise the random data is
always pulled dynamically from /dev/urandom. If you can reproduce a bug on a
small object, use a constant
.I file
as randomization input.

.SH OPTIONS - GRAPHING
.TP
.I -n
Do a
.I natural loop analysis
on the control flow graph. This is only useful in conjunction with either the
.I -c
or
.I -l
output option. If this option is enabled, for every basic block in the CFG a
dominator set is build. Upon this set, a loop detection analysis is
performed. Only reducible flow graphs can be analyzed this way. This usually
includes all compiler generated code, though ;). The header block is marked in
aquamarine (light blue-green).
For a more detailed explanation of the loop detection, see below at
.I LOOP DETECTION.
Please note, that if you use this option, you cannot use
.I xvcg
anymore to display the graphs, as boxed subgraphs are used to display the loop
nesting. The
.I aiSee
program supports a superset of the VCG graph language which can handle this.
Get a free version of aiSee at http://www.absint.com/aisee/download/. You
might also consider symlinking
.I aisee.bin
to
.I xvcg
so that the graphs are displayed from
.I objobf.
.TP
.I -N
Do a
.I natural loop analysis
just as with the
.I -n
option, but using the heuristics recommended in the Dragon book. There, the
unification of multiple possible loops is prefered, whereas the method used
with
.I -n
prefers the nesting of those loops. Read below at
.I LOOP DETECTION.
.TP
.I "-l func"
Dump a register usage analysis for function
.I func.
More specifically, a live register dataflow analysis for the function is done
and written as VCG graph to the file "output.vcg". If the
.I VCG
program is installed as
.I xvcg,
an output file "output.ps" is created and displayed using
.I gv.
.TP
.I "-c func"
A simple control flow graph (CFG) of the function
.I func
is written as VCG file to "output.vcg". As with the
.I -l
option,
.I xvcg
is ran and the output is displayed with
.I gv.
.TP
.I "-d func"
Do a dominator tree analysis on the CFG of function
.I func
and dump the graph as VCG file to "output.vcg".
.I xvcg
and
.I gv
are ran as usual. A basic block B1 is dominated by another basic block B2, if
all codepathes to B1 go through B2. The dominator tree is visual candy, as
all blocks above a certain block B1 are executed before B1 is. The dominator
tree itself is not very useful to human analysis, but substantial for loop
detection.
.TP
.I -u
Do a register usage profile. Every instruction in the whole object is examined
for the CPU registers it uses. The final profile is dumped to stdout. Can be
useful to quickly see how optimized an object file is (equal distribution =
optimized, eax/edx prefered = unoptimized).
.TP
.I -i
Do an instruction usage profile. As with
.I -u,
every instruction in the object is processed. The main opcode index counted
(for example there is only one opcode index for all variants of mov). The
final profile of the object is printed to the standard output.

.SH OPTIONS - OBFUSCATION
.TP
.I -e
Entangle basic blocks of all functions in the object. That is, the basic block
order is randomized globally while the control flow is properly maintained.
However, there are no opaque predicates between basic blocks right now, and
the entanglement is easily seperateable (but it does fsck with IDA very well
already ;)
.TP
.I -j rate
Insert junk instructions at 
.I rate.
For each instruction in the basic block the probability that a junk
instruction is inserted is
.I rate.
The recommended value is between 0.5 and 0.9. This will be more fine grained
in future versions, as currently only one instruction is spilled at max.
.TP
.I -m
Mark all inserted junk instructions by prepending a NOP. This is only helpful
if the
.I -j
option is used.

.SH EXAMPLES

The included simple example shows how to use the obfuscator:
.PP
.in +4
.nf
gcc -c -o quicksort.o quicksort.c
objobf -v 3 -e -o quicksort_obf.o quicksort.o
gcc -o main main.c quicksort_obf.o

gcc -c -O2 -o reducebind.o reducebind.c
objobf -e reducebind.o
gcc -o reducebind-obfuscated output.o
strip reducebind-obfuscated
objobf -j -e reducebind.o
gcc -o reducebind-more-obfuscated output.o

objobf -n -l quicksort quicksort.o
aisee.bin -color -psoutput output.ps output.vcg
gv output.ps
.fi
.in -4
.SH KNOWN BUGS
.I Multiple code sections.
Only one code section (usually .text) in the object is supported. The most
common case of multiple code sections are global constructors or destructors
in C++ programs or system library initialization functions (in both cases the
sections are called .init and .fini).

.I Dangling *common symbols.
To ease analyzation, no interpretation of symbols refering to the *common
section has been implemented (*common is what will turn into .bss at link
time). To fix this, use the following command line before feeding the object
into
.I objobf

.in +4
.nf
ld -q -r -d -o input-temp.o input.o
objobf input-temp.o
.fi
.in -4

.I Too many loops detected.
The loop analysis has trouble if there are more than one backedge to a loop
head. Then, two scenarios are possible. Either - the first case - it could be
that there are multiple loops nested within each other, and two loops should
be displayed. This case is correctly handled. Or, - the second case - it is
only one loop with multiple continuation points, such as continue statements.
This case is not correctly handled and multiple nested loops are displayed,
which all share the same loop head. I implemented algorithms for both cases,
but the problem is to choose the proper one. To solve this problem, further
loop analysis would be required. The Dragon book advises to assume it as one
loop, while I find it easier to manually group multiple nested loops as one,
once it is clear that it is just one loop. You can choose between the two
methods of loop detection with the
.I -n
(prefer the nesting of loops) and
.I -N
(prefer the unification of loops) options. Maybe in the future I will
implement induction variable analysis and provide better heuristics to select
the proper nested/group-as-one algorithm.

.SH LOOP DETECTION

Within the control flow graph, there are edges which have the property of
being
.I back edges.
A back edge is an edge where the target basic block dominates its source basic
block (see the
.I -d option
for the definition of dominator blocks). All such edges may imply a loop in
the program. The list of basic blocks within this loop is called
.I natural loop.
One basic block of the loop is the so called
.I header block
which is the first one and the loops entry point. All natural loops only have
one single entry point.

.SH BUG REPORTS

If you find a bug (and that is for sure), please try to reproduce it with an
object as small as possible, as the analysis will be easier then. Please mail
me at
.I scut@team-teso.net

